Add proposal for AI-powered automation for ballerina connector generation from SDKs (#1435)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-spec: beps/connector-automation/1434_ai_powered_automation_for_ballerina_connector_generation_from_sdks.md

## Non-Goals

-   This proposal is not intended to supersede the manual design of the high-level API surface for exceptionally complex, non-standard SDKs; however, it aims to deliver a starting point that is 90% complete.
-   The project's scope is strictly limited to generating Ballerina connectors from Java SDKs; support for other language SDKs is currently excluded. However, the architecture has been designed with pluggability to accommodate non-Java SDKs in the future, upon the availability of Ballerina language support for the corresponding Foreign Function Interface (FFI).

## Design

The solution's foundation is a pair of sequential GitHub Actions workflows encompassing seven specialized AI modules. The system adheres to a "Generate and Validate" architectural paradigm, wherein AI-generated code undergoes immediate compilation, and any resulting errors are subsequently channeled back into the model for rectification.

### System Components

1.  **SDK Analyzer:** This module performs a comprehensive analysis of the input SDK to extract foundational API structures, method signatures, and type definitions, serving as the definitive source of truth for the integration.

> 2.  **Additional Information Provider (Optional):** Designed to augment the core analysis, this distinct module aggregates semantic context from supporting sources, specifically Code Examples and docs. It enriches the upstream data flow by supplying idiomatic usage patterns and descriptive metadata, thereby enhancing the fidelity of downstream specification derivation, example generation, and documentation synthesis.

Reviewer: Initially I thought this was examples of how the SDK is used. But, is it Ballerina examples? I'm guessing examples of how the SDK is used will also be important though as would the Ballerina samples.

Shall we clarify either way?

Author: These are not Ballerina examples. They show how the SDK is used.

We can make this clear in the docs to avoid confusion.

Reviewer: How do we give Ballerina-specific input, then? Like what it means to be idiomatic Ballerina code?

Author: Ballerina-specific input is provided through the Ballerina best practices and mapping rules that are given as input to the API Specification Generator module.

## Goals

-   To achieve complete automation in the generation of idiomatic Ballerina connectors from SDKs, encompassing source code, guides, API documentation, and examples.
-   To synthesize robust Foreign Function Interface (FFI) definitions and native language interoperability code without requiring manual development.
-   To automatically produce comprehensive unit tests (covering both positive and negative scenarios) and illustrative usage examples.
-   To guarantee that all generated code successfully compiles and executes through the implementation of an iterative self-correction mechanism.

## Non-Goals

-   This proposal is not intended to supersede the manual design of the high-level API surface for exceptionally complex, non-standard SDKs; however, it aims to deliver a starting point that is 90% complete.

> -   The project\'s scope is strictly limited to generating Ballerina connectors from Java SDKs; support for other language SDKs is currently excluded. However, the architecture has been designed with pluggability to accommodate non-Java SDKs in the future, upon the availability of Ballerina language support for the corresponding Foreign Function Interface (FFI).

Reviewer 2: We do not need to escape here right?

Check other places as well

```suggestion
-   The project's scope is strictly limited to generating Ballerina connectors from Java SDKs; support for other language SDKs is currently excluded. However, the architecture has been designed with pluggability to accommodate non-Java SDKs in the future, upon the availability of Ballerina language support for the corresponding Foreign Function Interface (FFI).
```

# AI-Powered Automation for Ballerina Connector Generation from SDKs

-   Authors: Kanistan Kanesalingam

> 

Reviewer 2: Removed unwanted new lines. Check in all places
```suggestion
```

-   Reviewed by: Danesh Kuruppu, Tharmigan Krishnananthalingam

> -   Created date: 2026-01-23

Reviewer 2: Change the dates

-   Updated date: 2026-01-30

-   Issue: [1434](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-spec/issues/1434)

-   State: InProgress

## Summary

> This proposal outlines an AI-driven workflow to automate the generation

Reviewer 2: No need to break the sentences with new lines. Add the complete paragraph
